What does rice water do for your hair? https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321353
Using rice water for hair
History
Benefits
Research
How to make
How to use
Skin benefits
Takeaway


Some people in China and Japan have long used rice water on their hair to enable it to grow longer and to stop it from turning gray. Anecdotal evidence suggests it may also be effective at preventing tangles, but more research is necessary.

Rice water is the starchy water left over after rice is cooked or left to soak. It is thought to make the hair smooth and shiny, as well as help it grow faster.

This article looks at the beauty benefits of rice water hair treatments and whether scientific research backs up the purported results.

Using rice water for hair
Rice grains contain 75–80 percent starch.

Rice water is the starchy water that remains after soaking or cooking rice.

Rice water is thought to contain many of the vitamins and minerals contained in rice. These include:

amino acids
B vitamins
vitamin E
minerals
antioxidants

History
According to researchersTrusted Source, women in the Heian period (794 to 1185 CE) in Japan had floor-length hair they kept healthy by bathing it in rice water.

A modern-day equivalent of this story can be found in China. The Yao women, who live in a village called Huangluo in China, are famed for having hair that averages 6 feet long.

In addition to its incredible length, the Yao women’s hair is said to keep its color for longer, as they do not begin to get gray hair until they reach their 80s.

The Yao women credit the length and color of their hair to the fact they bathe it in rice water.

In recent years, beauty advice websites and product developers have caught on to this tradition. Now, the rice water trend is spreading.


Benefits
Advocates of using rice water for hair believe it:

detangles the hair
makes hair smoother
increases shine
makes hair stronger
helps hair grow long

What the research says
As the popularity of using rice water for hair increases, there is growing anecdotal evidence about its benefits. But are the claims scientifically proven?

At first glance, a 2010 paperTrusted Source suggests they may be. The authors note that rice water may reduce surface friction and increase hair elasticity. However, the study relies on historical examples to draw unsupported conclusions.

Elsewhere, a research facility in Japan has developed an imaging technique that visualizes the strengthening effect of inositol on hair. Inositol is contained in rice water.

It is important to note that this research is published directly by a facility that may have commercial interests.

To date, the benefits of rice water for hair remain unproven. More research is needed to support anecdotal evidence about the benefits of rice water for hair.

How to make rice water
There are several different ways to make rice water, including

Soaking
Soaking is the quickest way to make rice water.

To use this method:

take ½ cup of uncooked rice
rinse thoroughly
place rice in a bowl with 2–3 cups of water
leave to soak for 30 minutes
strain the rice water into a clean bowl
Fermented vs. plain rice water
Some rice water advocates claim fermented rice water has more benefits than plain rice water.

According to a 2012 study, fermented substances have a higher amount of antioxidants. Antioxidants may combat hair and skin cell damage, which is why they are typical ingredients in beauty products.

To ferment rice water, follow steps 1–4 of the soaking method. Before straining, leave the rice water to stand at room temperature for up to 2 days, allowing it to ferment. Strain the rice water into a clean bowl before use.

Boiling
Another way to make rice water is by boiling the rice.

Cover ½ cup of rice with double the water typically used for cooking. Cook the rice in boiling water and strain the rice water into a clean bowl before use.

How to use rice water
Rice water can replace a commercial conditioner. To do this, a person should:

wash hair with shampoo
rinse thoroughly with water from the tap
pour rice water onto their hair
massage the rice water into the hair and scalp
leave on for up to 20 minutes
rinse hair thoroughly using warm water from the tap
Skin benefits
In addition to its potential beauty benefits for the hair, rice water may also benefit the skin.

A 2002 studyTrusted Source found that the starch in rice water helped damaged skin heal for people with dermatitis.

Takeaway
Rinsing hair in rice water is a traditional beauty treatment popular in many regions in Asia.

Having gained attention online, this alternative beauty remedy is now popular across the world.

Many people find rice water to be a beneficial hair treatment. Historical examples and anecdotal evidence suggest rice water may improve the strength, texture, and growth of hair.

Most scientific evidence about the treatment is inconclusive, so more research is needed to prove the benefits of using rice water.

While its benefits for hair remain unproven, using a rice water hair rinse is safe to try at home and may also be used on the skin. It has been found to promote skin health in people with dermatitis.



How we reviewed this article:

SOURCES
Medical News Today has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical journals and associations. We only use quality, credible sources to ensure content accuracy and integrity. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.
De Paepe, K., Hachem, J. P., Vanpee, E., Roseeuw, D., & Rogiers, V. (2002). Effect of rice starch as a bath additive on the barrier function of healthy but SLS-damaged skin and skin of atopic patients [Abstract]. Acta Dermato-Venereologica, 82(3), 184–186
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12353708
Development of hair-care products from rice water. (n.d.)
http://www.spring8.or.jp/pdf/en/indu_appli/p10-11.pdf
Hunaefi, D., Akumo, D. N., Riedel, H., & Iryna, S. (2012). The effect of lactobacillus plantarum ATCC 8014 and lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM fermentation on antioxidant properties of selected in vitro sprout culture of orthosiphon aristatus (Java tea) as a model study. Antioxidants, 1(1), 4–32
http://www.mdpi.com/2076-3921/1/1/4/htm
Inamasu, S., Ikuyama. R., Fujisaki, Y., & Sugimoto, K. I. (2010, September 1). Abstracts: The effect of rinse water obtained from the washing of rice (YU-SU-RU) as a hair treatment [Abstract]. International Journal of Cosmetic Science, 32(5), 392–393
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1468-2494.2010.00605_3.x
Verma, D. K., & Srivastav, P. P. (2017, January). Proximate composition, mineral content and fatty acids analyses or aromatic and non-aromatic Indian rice. Rice Science, 24(1), 21–31
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1672630816300713



Could Rice Water Be the Secret To Healthier Hair?
https://health.clevelandclinic.org/the-benefits-of-using-rice-water-on-your-hair








While there’s little risk in trying this hair care treatment, there isn’t much science to back up the claims





jar of rice water and brush, with rice scattered around table
The secret to longer, stronger and shinier hair might be in your kitchen cupboard.

Advertisement


Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy

Using rice water to boost hair health is a concept that dates back centuries in Asian culture. In more modern times, the idea has received millions of hair-flipping endorsements on social media.

But will a rice water rinse truly give you locks that you’ll love? While millennia of beauty parlor chatter says yes, let’s comb through what’s fact and fiction with dermatologists Shilpi Khetarpal, MD and Alok Vij, MD.

How might rice water help your hair?
Rice water is the starchy liquid created when rice is soaked or cooked in water. The cloudy concoction holds many of the nutrients that make rice one of the world’s most important food sources.

So, how might that help your hair? Let’s start with the starch in rice that’s released into the water.

“The starch acts like a conditioner,” explains Dr. Vij. “It lays on the outer follicle of hair, what’s called the cuticle, and works to prevent the follicles from rubbing against each other and fraying or breaking.”

Rice also contains an antioxidant known as inositol, which has been touted as a “hair growth agent,” plus a long list of vitamins and minerals that may protect hair against damaging stresses.

Those vitamins and minerals include:

Vitamin B.
Vitamin E.
Fiber.
Magnesium.
Manganese.
Zinc.
Possible benefits of rice water
The list of perks connected to rice water runs as long as Rapunzel’s fairy tale hair. Fans of rice water say it can make your hair shinier and stronger, while also keeping troublesome tangles to a minimum.

But the big selling point is hair growth. Legend has it that rice water helped women of the imperial court during Japan’s Heian period grow floor-length hair. The long tresses were called kurokami.

And today in China, rice water is part of a regimen that earned the town of Huangluo a Guinness Book of World Records designation as the “World’s Longest Haired Village.”

But is rice water really that powerful?

“Anecdotally, there seems to be a lot of potential benefit to using rice water on your hair,” notes Dr. Khetarpal. “But it’s not something that has been scientifically proven.”

Advertisement


Besides that, most people’s hair growth is genetically coded, emphasizes Dr. Vij. “There are some modifiable factors such as nutrition, age and overall health, but haircare practices themselves are usually a very minor component,” he says.

Are there risks to using rice water on hair?
Aside from depleting your pantry supplies, there’s little reason to worry about using rice water on your hair. “There are no harmful chemicals or additives, so that limits your risk of damage,” says Dr. Khetarpal.

But if you’re dealing with scalp inflammation, she cautions against using rice water to avoid additional irritation.

Not rinsing the mixture thoroughly from your hair and scalp also could cause irritation.

How to make and use rice water
As far as DIY beauty projects go, it doesn’t get much easier than rice water. (The name of this hair elixir also serves as the ingredient list, after all.)

There are three main ways to make rice water, including:

A short soak of rice in water lasting 30 minutes to two hours.
Boiling the rice-water combo.
A long soak of a day or more to ferment the water.
Advertisement


Dr. Khetarpal says the shorter option offers you the best chance of success. The boiling process may diminish some of the nutrients, she notes, while the long soak could add bacteria into your mix.

Most online instructions for making rice water call for rinsing the rice before starting the process and straining the final product. More detailed steps can be found with a quick internet search.

Once you have your rice water, instructions for using it are pretty simple. “After finished washing your hair, douse your hair in the rice water and let it sit for about 20 minutes before you rinse it out,” instructs Dr. Vij.

Can you eat the rice after making rice water?
Multitaskers, rejoice: Dinner and a ‘do (hairdo, that is) are on the table. There’s no reason for you to throw out all that rice after making rice water, says Dr. Khetarpal. Nothing in the process makes the rice inedible.

Plus, eating the rice allows its nutrients to help your whole body instead of just your hair. As a bonus, soaking rice shortens its cooking time, too.

Bottom line
So, should you raid your pantry to improve your hair? In the end, it’s a personal decision, say Dr. Khetarpal and Dr. Vij. There isn’t really any harm in trying this legendary tactic for more luxurious locks.

“Anecdotal evidence is great, but there’s not a lot of scientific evidence behind using rice water,” reiterates Dr. Vij. “But as I always tell my patients, ‘If something works for you, I can’t argue with that.’”

But if rice water isn’t quite your thing, and you’re looking for ways to boost your hair growth, here are a few other options you might want to consider.





Rice water for hair: Is it the miracle social media claims?
https://health.unl.edu/rice-water-hair-it-miracle-social-media-claims

Popular TikTok beauty influencers are singing the praises of rice water hair treatments to achieve smoother, shinier and stronger hair. Could the secret to growing long luxurious locks be as easy as reaching into your pantry?

The rice water claim
The alternative treatment has recently attracted a lot of attention online, but women in China, Japan, and Southeast Asia have used rice water on their hair for centuries. The thinking is that the starchy water from rice is rich in vitamins and minerals, including vitamins E and B, amino acids, antioxidants and inositol (touted as a hair rejuvenator). 

The claim? Rice water may be useful for all hair types and help grow floor-length, silky hair. It may promote elasticity, increase volume, tame frizz, protect hair from damage and cure dandruff.

The rice water method
Take a cup of uncooked rice, rinse it, add two or three cups of water and soak for 30 minutes. Strain the rice water into a bowl and presto – you have a home hair elixir. Some claim you can boil it, while others believe there are benefits to fermenting the rice water, claiming the process boosts the antioxidant levels.

How do you use it? Start by washing your hair with shampoo and rinsing. Pour the rice water over your hair and massage it into your hair and scalp. Leave on for up to 20 minutes then rinse thoroughly with warm water.

Is rice water hair treatment safe?
For any treatment plan, it’s important to consider the risks and the benefits, according to Matthew Stephany, MD, Nebraska Medicine medical director of General Dermatology. Countless products claim results without therapeutic trials or a body of proof that a product does what it claims. While there are very few risks to using a product like rice water for hair, there is also not likely to be any significant benefit.

Using rice water is considered a natural home remedy, but those with certain skin conditions should use caution.

Eczema or atopic dermatitis – This is a condition in which the skin is unable to maintain an adequate moisture barrier, which then leads to inflammation and itching. This does not guarantee a person with this condition will have a reaction to rice water, but it should be approached in a more strategic manner in which they could test a small area on the scalp for a reaction before lathering the entire scalp.
Any hair loss or alopecia – Use caution if considering rice water as the initial treatment for any hair loss (alopecia). There are several different types of hair loss and some have FDA-approved medications. If a person is experiencing significant hair loss, Dr. Stephany recommends seeing a health care provider.
Is there really a difference between natural or synthetic products?
Debates rage on between so-called natural hair products and synthetic hair products. Despite the controversy and passion each side possesses, very few solid scientific studies validate one side or the other.

Stephany’s advice: If using a product makes your skin, hair or nails feel better, that's what matters as long as it's not putting your health at risk. Remember that natural products can cause as much of a problem for your skin as synthetic products. For example, poison ivy is a natural product but not recommended for anyone to use for skin care. On the other hand, petroleum jelly is a synthetic material great for wound healing and is highly unlikely to cause any sort of allergic reaction or irritation on the skin.

The rice water verdict
A miracle cure? Probably not. But if you're free of troublesome skin conditions, scalp inflammation, or sensitive skin that may be irritated, most likely it won't hurt to give it a try. You may even find it helpful. Still, the benefits of rice water remain unproven. More research is needed (beyond studies tied to commercial interests) to validate anecdotal evidence.


















